**[Title]{.underline}**

﻿The properties of discs around planets and brown dwarfs as evidence for
disc fragmentation

**[Complete Citation.]{.underline} (Author(s), Date of publication,
Title (book or article), Journal, Volume #, Issue #, pages:**

Stamatellos, D., & Herczeg, G. J. 2015, Mon Not R Astron Soc, 449, 3432

**[If web access]{.underline} url; date accessed:**

**NA**

**[Key Words]{.underline}:**

Accretion; accretion discs; Brown dwarfs; Hydrodynamics; Methods:
numerical; Protoplanetary discs; Stars: formation; Stars: low-mass

**[General subject:]{.underline}**

Investigating the properties of discs that form around planetary mass
objects and brown dwarfs and the evidence they present towards planet
formation by disc fragmentation.

**[Specific Subject:]{.underline}**

-   Predictions of the masses of discs around objects formed by disc
    fragmentation (brown dwarfs and planets)

-   Calculation of accretion rate onto formed objects and comparison
    with observation

**[Hypothesis:]{.underline}**

Low mass objects (planets and brown dwarfs) seen in observations are
formed by gravitational instability as defined by the disc fragmentation
model. The properties of the discs around substellar objects may hold
information about their formation.

**[Methodology:]{.underline}**

Using data from Stamatellos and Whitworth (2009a) where 12 simulations
were run for gravitationally unstable discs and solar like stars. All
sims were the same other than the random seed to construct each disc --
the properties of the system are constant throughout the 12 initial
conditions.

Used DRAGON SPH code which uses Stamatellos et al (2007b) treatment of
radiative transfer. Time dependant viscosity with α = 0.1 β = 2 α with
the Balsara switch activated.

**[Analytic model of disc evolution:]{.underline}**

Used to model disc evolution with time to save computational expense.

Disc around secondary object is geometrically thin and undergoes viscous
evolution under the gravitational influence of the central object
(planet or brown dwarf)

Shakura and Sunyaev viscosity prescription

Equations 3 - 11

**[Result(s):]{.underline}**

The initial unstable discs fragment into 5-11 objects in a few kys. 96
objects formed across the 12 sims -- some escape and some are in binary
systems, those that are not are shown in fig 1 (mass vs sm axis).

\~70% of the formed objects have a disc of their own around them with
masses of up to a few M_j and extent of 10s of au

There is no significant correlation between mass of each disc and the
semi major axis of the object it is around -- **disc mass determined by
object's movement through parent disc, not where they are in it.**

70%-80% of the parent disc accreted onto the parent start within 10-20
kyr by which point the parent disc mass is reduced to less than 0.01
solar masses.

Secondary objects that are formed in the parent disc exist on wide
orbits so it is unlikely that interactions between parent and secondary
discs are important.

It is assumed that the secondary discs are **seperated from parent disc,
evolve independently and stop accreting from the parent disc**

The M_disc -- M_star scaling relation from Andrew et al (2013)
underestimates the disc masses by more than an order of magnitude. No
convincing dependence of disc mass on stellar mass as there is with
higher mass systems. ('stellar' 'star' refers to any object formed by
gravitational instability so can mean planets and brown dwarfs in this
context). **This is a characteristic of formation by disc
fraugmentation**. The secondary disc accreted matter following its
formation and mass increases.

There is a similar relation between the mass accretion onto an object
and it's mass, suggested to hold for planet/brown dwarf masses. The
results of the MAR -- Mass plot show scatter in the relation, possibly
attributed to different ages of systems plotted.

The MAR for 3 planetary mass companions in Zhou et al (2014) are an
order of magnitude higher than those predicted by the relation

Relatively high MAR are indicative of formation by disc fragmentation or
the collapse of low mass pre-substellar cores

Lower viscosity discs evolve slower and masses and MAR are higher for
longer.

**[Summary of key points:]{.underline}**

Objects that form by disc fragmentation have MAR that are independent of
the host mass and higher than expected from scaling relations that were
derived for higher mass objects

Low mass objects form in similar way to those of higher mass by self
gravitating gas but their individual discs accrete more material as they
migrate through the parent disc and evolve independently. MAR onto
secondary objects from their discs is higher than if they were formed in
isolation. This assumption is not pivotal, if they did not evolve
independently the secondary disc would continue to accrete mass from the
parent disc and thus bolter the conclusions presented.

Secondary objects that have discs have higher masses than expected (or
mass accretion rates higher than expected)

At these low masses ( \<10 Jupiter masses), the scaling relations
diverge from the model presented here.

**[Context]{.underline} (how this article relates to other work in the
field):**

Finds divergence in the scaling relations that are used for higher mass
objects to determine disc mass and mass accretion rate, they are not
suitable for lower mass objects.

Suggests a further analysis of the scaling relation to divide the sample
into two subgroups to account for the low mass disc masses and accretion
rates to test if lower mass objects obey difference scaling relations.

Future observations from ALMA of the accretion rates onto secondary
objects will aid the prescription of their formation mechanism

**[Significance]{.underline} (to work in the field, to my own work):**

I use equations 4-11 (analytic model of disc evolution) to fit a
function to the mass accretion rates calculated from the results from
GIZMO SPH simulations.

**[Importance Figures/Tables]{.underline} (Brief description and page
number):**

Figure 1, page 3 (3434 of volume) -- Masses of a select number of the
objects that are formed by disc fragmentation.

**[Cited references to follow up on:]{.underline}**

﻿Stamatellos D., Whitworth A. P., 2009a, MNRAS, 392, 413

﻿Stamatellos D., Whitworth A. P., Bisbas T., Goodwin S., 2007b, A&A, 475,
37

﻿Andrews S. M., Rosenfeld K. A., Kraus A. L., Wilner D. J., 2013, ApJ,
771, 129

﻿Zhou Y., Herczeg G. J., Kraus A. L., Metchev S., Cruz K. L., 2014, ApJ,
783, L17

**[Other Comments:]{.underline}**
